DO NOT MERGE sketch of resource oriented DAP API (#367)
ietf-wg-ppm/draft-ietf-ppm-dap: api-resources.md

Some resources are owned by another resource, and so their URI will contain two identifiers. For instance, a report belongs to a task, so the URI is `[base]/tasks/{task-id}/reports/{report-id}`.

Generally, if a resource supports the `GET` method, it also supports `HEAD`. The response to `HEAD` is exactly the same as `GET`, but the response contains no body.

If an HTTP method is listed in a resource's required HTTP methods, implementations MUST provide responses as indicated. Otherwise, implementations MAY implement methods on resources however they wish, including returning an error like HTTP 405 Method Not Allowed.

We use HTTP `PUT` requests for idempotent creation of resources. Server responses to `PUT` requests follow [RFC 9110 section 9.3.4](https://httpwg.org/specs/rfc9110.html#rfc.section.9.3.4).

Finally, a quick reminder of some HTTP semantics: `GET` and `PUT` are idempotent (i.e., the same request may be made multiple times without changing state in the server more than once, and the response will be the same each time). `POST` is not idempotent. `GET` requests may not have bodies.

> We care a lot about idempotence because we need to account for cases where a client makes a request but never sees the response, and thus needs a way to recover from this state of uncertainty.

Author: I think you (quite understandably) read this as meaning a DAP client, but here I am using "client" in the sense of an HTTP client, such that the leader is a client when it makes requests to the helper, and the collector is a client when it makes requests to the leader. I'll clarify this.

- [ ] clarify meaning of "client" to mean HTTP client, not DAP client

### Tasks

TODO: do we want a task resource that we can GET and PUT in the protocol? Does this collide with https://wangshan.github.io/draft-wang-ppm-dap-taskprov/draft-wang-ppm-dap-taskprov.html or https://github.com/divergentdave/draft-dcook-ppm-dap-interop-test-design?

### HPKE configurations

#### Path

`/hpke_config[?task_id=task-id]`

The `task_id` query parameter is optional, as described in https://www.ietf.org/archive/id/draft-ietf-ppm-dap-02.html#section-4.3.1.

##### Alternatives

> An HPKE config has an ID, so we could use a path `hpke_configs/hpke-config-id`. However, a client should never need to get any HPKE config except for the "current" one, so does it make sense to expand the API surface with a path param for HPKE config ID?

Reviewer: As ChrisW would no doubt ask at this juncture: What are your requirements here? Why would we need multiple HPKE configs?

One reason was previously pointed out by @ekr: https://github.com/ietf-wg-ppm/draft-ietf-ppm-dap/issues/248. TL;DR: The Client and Aggregator may not initially agree on what HPKE ciphersuite to use. But we may not need to expose multiple configs simultaneously, if the Client can indicate in its request which suites it supports.

Author: This change will be complicated enough, so I think I will choose not to solve #248, too, so I lean toward leaving the `hpke_config` exactly as it is.

- [ ] put `hpke_config` back the way it was

#### Representation

Uses the existing [`struct HpkeConfig`](https://www.ietf.org/archive/id/draft-ietf-ppm-dap-02.html#section-4.3.1-6).

```
struct {
  HpkeConfigId id;
  HpkeKemId kem_id;
  HpkeKdfId kdf_id;
  HpkeAeadKdfId aead_id;
  HpkePublicKey public_key;
} HpkeConfig;
```

#### Required HTTP methods

##### GET/HEAD

The response body is a `struct HpkeConfig` representing the `hpke_config`.

### Reports

#### Path

`/tasks/{task-id}/reports/{report-id}`

`report-id` uniquely identifies a report in a task. It is chosen by the client when uploading a report.

#### Representation

```
struct {
  Time time;
  Extension extensions<0..2^16-1>;
} ReportMetadata;

struct {
  ReportMetadata metadata;
  opaque public_share<0..2^32-1>;
  HpkeCiphertext encrypted_input_shares<1..2^32-1>;
} Report;
```

#### Required HTTP methods

##### GET/HEAD

> The response body is a `struct Report` representing the report.

Reviewer: Who needs this functionality, and for what purpose? How do we think about how long this report needs to be kept around?

This might be a bit tricky for Daphne because we may want to shard reports by timestamp.

Author: You're right, I was just putting it in because semantically it's obvious, but there's no protocol use case, so we shouldn't specify it (implementations are free to implement this if they find it useful).

- [ ] remove GETters we don't explicitly need in the protocol

##### PUT

Idempotent upload of a report to an aggregator. The request body is a `struct Report`.

This is analogous to DAP-02's `POST /upload`.

### An aggregation job

Only the helper supports this resource.

#### Path

`/tasks/{task-id}/aggregation_jobs/{aggregation-job-id}`

`aggregation-job-id` uniquely identifies an aggregation job. It is chosen by the leader when it dispatches a job to the helper.

#### Representation

```
enum {
  continued(0),
  finished(1),
  failed(2),
  (255),
} PrepareStepState;

struct {
  ReportID report_id;
  PrepareStepState prepare_step_state;
  select (PrepareStep.prepare_step_state) {
    case continued: opaque prep_msg<0..2^32-1>; /* VDAF preparation message */
    case finished: Empty;
    case failed: ReportShareError;
  }
} PrepareStep;

struct {
  u16 round;
  PrepareStep prepare_steps<1..2^32-1>;
} AggregateJob
```

See "POST", below, for explanation and justification of the `round` field.

#### Required HTTP methods

##### GET/HEAD

> The response body is a `struct AggregateJob` representing the current state of the reports in the job.

Reviewer: Who needs to implement this: the Leader, Helper, or both? Presumably just the Helper? How long do we need to keep this around?

Author: Just the helper, as noted above, but we do need to--

- [ ] add some language discussing how long servers should have to respond to GET aggregate jobs, aggregate shares, collections, considering task expiration and DELETE requests against these

This is analogous to DAP-02's `POST /aggregate` with an `AggregateContinueReq`.

###### Context for the `round` field

The `round` field is needed so that the leader can recover from a response being lost. Suppose a 2-round VDAF is being executed, and that the leader does `PUT /tasks/{task-id}/aggregate_jobs/{aggregation-job-id}` and that request succeeds, so the helper responds with its first-round prepare messages. Then, the leader does `POST /tasks/{task-id}/aggregate_jobs/{aggregation-job-id}` with the first-round broadcast prepare message, but the helper's response gets lost during network transit.

If the helper received the `POST` and advanced its state to the second round, then the leader should do `GET /tasks/{task-id}/aggregate_jobs/{aggregation-job-id}` so it can compute the second round broadcast message and then do `POST /tasks/{task-id}/aggregate_jobs/{aggregation-job-id}` to have the helper move to the finished state. If the helper did not receive the `POST`, then the leader should re-send the first-round broadcast prepare message.

> But in DAP-02, the leader has no way to know what happened in the helper, leaving it unable to recover from this state. Adding a `round` field to the `AggregateJob` message enables the leader to reliably and idempotently find out what state the helper is in by doing `GET /tasks/{task-id}/aggregate_jobs/{aggregation-job-id}`, and then taking the appropriate next step.

Reviewer: Nice idea.

} Collection;
```

#### Required HTTP methods

##### GET/HEAD

If the collection is available, the response body is a `struct Collection`. Otherwise the server can return something like HTTP 202 Accepted to indicate it's not ready yet, or HTTP 404 if no such aggregate share request is known to the server.

This is analogous to DAP-02's `GET` on a collect job URI.

##### PUT

PUT to a collection resource is how the collector instructs the leader to assemble the aggregate shares. The request is an idempotent PUT, because if a collection with the provided ID already exists, its representation can be returned by the helper without further state mutation.

The request body is a `CollectReq`:

```
struct {
  QueryType query_type;
  select (Query.query_type) {
    case time_interval: Interval batch_interval;
    case fixed_size: Empty;
  }
} Query;

struct {
  Query query;
  opaque agg_param<0..2^16-1>; /* VDAF aggregation parameter */
} CollectReq;
```

If successful, the response from the helper is a `struct Collection`. That same share may later be obtained by a GET request on the resource.

This is analogous to DAP-02's `POST /collect`.

###### A note on `Query.fixed_size`

> `struct Query` is essentially identical to `struct BatchSelector`, so the note about `BatchSelector.fixed_size` from `PUT aggregate_share` applies here, except that a collection's ID is chosen by the collector.

Reviewer: This would change if we took #313.

##### DELETE

Instructs the leader to abandon the collection and allows the leader to discard all state related to it. This is akin to DELETE on an aggregate share for the helper (indeed, the leader might send a DELETE to the helper's aggregate share resource after its corresponding collection is deleted).

This is analogous to DAP-02's `DELETE` on a collect job URI.

#### Alternatives: `collection-id`, `PUT` vs. `POST` and idempotence?

This proposal introduces the notion of a `collection-id`, which is chosen by the collector when it sends `CollectReq` to helper. In DAP-02, a collection is already uniquely identified by the combination of the aggregation parameter and the query, meaning we can get by without `collection-id`. Let's sketch out what the API would look like so we can weigh pros and cons.

`POST /tasks/{task-id}/collections`

> The body is a `CollectReq`, defined as above. The request method is `POST` instead of `PUT` because I don't think this request can be idempotent. Let's say a collector makes a time interval query over some interval _i_ and it is received by the leader at time _t1_. At _t1_, the leader has _n1_ reports that fall into the interval _i_. Then, suppose at least one more report that falls into _i_ arrives and the leader and helper prepare it. Then, at _t2 > t1_, the collector sends a query with the same interval _i_ again.

Reviewer: nit: Avoid using italics "_blah_" in I-Ds. this doesn't get rendered the way you want. (Look at the draft-ietf-ppm-dap.txt.)

Generally, if a resource supports the `GET` method, it also supports `HEAD`. The response to `HEAD` is exactly the same as `GET`, but the response contains no body.

If an HTTP method is listed in a resource's required HTTP methods, implementations MUST provide responses as indicated. Otherwise, implementations MAY implement methods on resources however they wish, including returning an error like HTTP 405 Method Not Allowed.

We use HTTP `PUT` requests for idempotent creation of resources. Server responses to `PUT` requests follow [RFC 9110 section 9.3.4](https://httpwg.org/specs/rfc9110.html#rfc.section.9.3.4).

Finally, a quick reminder of some HTTP semantics: `GET` and `PUT` are idempotent (i.e., the same request may be made multiple times without changing state in the server more than once, and the response will be the same each time). `POST` is not idempotent. `GET` requests may not have bodies.

We care a lot about idempotence because we need to account for cases where a client makes a request but never sees the response, and thus needs a way to recover from this state of uncertainty.

### Tasks

> TODO: do we want a task resource that we can GET and PUT in the protocol? Does this collide with https://wangshan.github.io/draft-wang-ppm-dap-taskprov/draft-wang-ppm-dap-taskprov.html or https://github.com/divergentdave/draft-dcook-ppm-dap-interop-test-design?

Reviewer 2: I think it can work with taskprov, which specifies how to provision a task in-band, it could end up calling the `PUT tasks/<task-id>` API. But so far the out-of-band task provision is not specified, so we may want to flesh that out (if we want to flesh that out) first.

Reviewer 2: @tgeoghegan what I meant was after the task has been provisioned following task_prov extension, the leader/helper can call a _PUT to /tasks/task-id_ to store the task object. The /tasks endpoint should not be exposed to client.

### HPKE configurations

#### Path

`/hpke_config[?task_id=task-id]`

The `task_id` query parameter is optional, as described in https://www.ietf.org/archive/id/draft-ietf-ppm-dap-02.html#section-4.3.1.

##### Alternatives

An HPKE config has an ID, so we could use a path `hpke_configs/hpke-config-id`. However, a client should never need to get any HPKE config except for the "current" one, so does it make sense to expand the API surface with a path param for HPKE config ID?

`GET /hpke_config` could redirect to `/hpke_config/current-hpke-config-id`, which would make this mostly transparent to clients, assuming they handle 3xx redirects properly.

> Instead of providing the task ID as a query parameter, we could also include it in the path, like `/tasks/task-id/hpke_config`, on the premise that the task ID is part of the resource's permanent identity. However, it's awkward to solve the global HPKE config case with this formulation. We could include a special task ID "global" so that clients could query `/tasks/global/hpke_config`.

Reviewer 2: @tgeoghegan returning global HPKE config when taskID unrecognized should work. But I prefer the `/hpke_config` endpoint, because it's a resource identified by hpke config id, task_id as a query parameter seems appropriate here.

  PrepareStep prepare_steps<1..2^32-1>;
} AggregateJob
```

See "POST", below, for explanation and justification of the `round` field.

#### Required HTTP methods

##### GET/HEAD

The response body is a `struct AggregateJob` representing the current state of the reports in the job.

##### PUT

PUT to an aggregate job is how the leader creates an aggregate job in the helper. The body is an `AggregateJobPutReq`:

```
struct {
  ReportMetadata metadata;
  opaque public_share<0..2^32-1>;
  HpkeCiphertext encrypted_input_share;
} ReportShare;

struct {
  QueryType query_type;
  select (PartialBatchSelector.query_type) {
    case time_interval: Empty;
    case fixed_size: BatchID batch_id;
  };
} PartialBatchSelector;

struct {
  opaque agg_param<0..2^16-1>;
  PartialBatchSelector part_batch_selector;
  ReportShare report_shares<1..2^32-1>;
} AggregateJobPutReq;
```

If successful, the helper's response is a `struct AggregateJob` where `prepare_steps` contains the helper's first-round VDAF prepare messages for the report shares in `AggregateJobPutReq`, or errors if `vdaf.prepare` failed for any report.

This is analogous to DAP-02's `POST /aggregate` with an `AggregateInitReq`.

> This request is idempotent, so if a helper receives multiple PUT requests for some aggregation job and the members of `AggregateJobPutReq` don't change, the helper can return 200 OK.

Reviewer 2: I don't think this is idempotent if aggregator proactively aggregates reports. If two identical AggregateJobPutReq is received before and after a batch is collected, then the later one will end up in error.

Reviewer 2: even without collect flow, anti-reply will make this non-idempotent too:

https://github.com/ietf-wg-ppm/draft-ietf-ppm-dap/blob/main/draft-ietf-ppm-dap.md#early-input-share-validation-early-input-share-validation

Author: It's idempotent in the sense that repeated `PUT /tasks/{task-id}/aggregation_jobs/{aggregation-job-id}` requests won't change the state, the key point being that it's safe for the leader to resend that request to the helper multiple times.

I also think that collection of a batch doesn't need to affect how the helper responds to this request. Let me sketch out a hypothetical:

1. Leader sends `PUT /tasks/{task-id}/aggregation_jobs/agg-job-1` (here, `agg-job-1` is some specific aggregation job identifier).
2. Helper replies with `struct AggregateJob` containing first-round prepare message
3. Leader sends `POST /tasks/{task-id}/aggregation_jobs/agg-job-1` with first-round broadcast prepare message
4. Helper prepares the reports, consuming batch query count for the relevant reports, and replies with `struct AggregateJob` containing a sequence of `PrepareStep` that are all in state `finished`.

At this point, if the leader sends `PUT /tasks/{task-id}/aggregation_jobs/agg-job-1` again (for whatever reason) _and if all the members of the `struct AggregateJobPutReq` are unchanged_, then the helper shouldn't re-evaluate anti-replay, because it can check its own storage, notice it's already prepared all those inputs, and return the same response it did in step (4). This doesn't violate anti-replay or privacy budgets because it's the exact same set of reports under the same aggregation parameter.

However, if the leader sends `PUT /tasks/{task-id}/aggregation_jobs/agg-job-1` _but varies any of the fields of the body_, then the helper should reject it. So I think we should specify that the aggregation job resource may not be mutated once created, except to advance its state through a POST request.

Further, if the leader sends `PUT /tasks/{task-id}/aggregation_jobs/agg-job-2` and the reports in that request's body overlap with the ones prepared by `agg-job-1`, then the helper has to apply anti-replay and either consume query limit or refuse to service the request, as appropriate.

Reviewer 2: @tgeoghegan makes sense, I think it's safe privacy wise since the agg flow is for preparation. My other concern is time related states, if the 2nd `PUT /tasks/{task-id}/aggregation_jobs/agg-job-1` come at a time the task_id has expired, would helper responds differently? If not then we are potentially asking helper to store output share or aggregate share forever.

Author: From DAP-02 [5.4.1](https://www.ietf.org/archive/id/draft-ietf-ppm-dap-02.html#section-5.4.1):

> Furthermore, the aggregators must store data related to a task as long as the current time has not passed this task's task_expiration. Aggregator MAY delete the task and all data pertaining to this task after task_expiration. Implementors SHOULD provide for some leeway so the collector can collect the batch after some delay.

So if a task expires, then from that point, a helper MAY respond to `PUT /tasks/{task-id}/aggregation_jobs/agg-job-1` with an error. It could also choose to continue providing the results of the aggregation job indefinitely. It's up to the implementation to decide when it discards data belonging to a task like aggregate results.

I think there will have to be some text explaining that leaders should be prepared for helpers to have discarded the results of an aggregation job, but I don't think this is an idempotence problem, because the state change (helper discarding aggregate job results) wasn't a result of repeated `PUT` requests by the leader.

Reviewer 2: I misunderstood idempotency, your explanation is correct: it's not about the response being the same but the state not changed by multiple calls.

> This request is idempotent, so if a helper receives multiple PUT requests for some aggregation job and the members of `AggregateJobPutReq` don't change, the helper can return 200 OK.

Author: I think you are raising the same question as Shan did [here](https://github.com/ietf-wg-ppm/draft-ietf-ppm-dap/pull/367/files#r997208345), so I would direct you to my response there. But you bring up an additional good point about mutating an aggregation job with a PUT, which I think we should explicitly forbid.

The idea here is that all the values in `struct AggregateJobPutReq` never need to be transmitted again during the handling of an aggregate job, which is why the message is not `struct AggregateJob`.

##### POST

POST to an aggregate job is how the leader steps an aggregate job. The request body is a `struct AggregateJob` where `prepare_steps` contains the leader's current-round prepare messages, and `round` is the number of the current round. The response is a `struct AggregateJob` where `prepare_steps` contains the helper's next-round prepare messages. The response's `round` field will be one more than the request's `round`.

> We use a POST here because this request is _not_ idempotent. Suppose the leader sends `POST /tasks/task-id/aggregate_jobs/aggregation-job-id` where the body has `round = 1`, and that this is successfully handled by the helper. Besides generating the response, this will have the side effect of advancing the state in the helper to round 2. If the leader were to resend the `POST /tasks/task-id/aggregate_jobs/aggregation-job-id` with `round = 1`, then the request should be rejected by the helper, because it has advanced to the next round.

Author: I like how this proposal eliminates an extra `GET` roundtrip. My intuition though is that the helper has to hold on not just to a hash of the previous request, but possibly also its response from the previous round. I've got to try to sketch out some failure scenarios in many-round VDAFs to see how this plays out.

> We use a POST here because this request is _not_ idempotent. Suppose the leader sends `POST /tasks/task-id/aggregate_jobs/aggregation-job-id` where the body has `round = 1`, and that this is successfully handled by the helper. Besides generating the response, this will have the side effect of advancing the state in the helper to round 2. If the leader were to resend the `POST /tasks/task-id/aggregate_jobs/aggregation-job-id` with `round = 1`, then the request should be rejected by the helper, because it has advanced to the next round.

Author: I think I get it now -- your scheme assumes that the leader would record its state before trying to advance state in the helper, which means that in the case of a crash, the helper can never be ahead of the leader.

I think that same assumption eliminates the need for the `GET` in the `round` solution. Suppose the helper is on round _n_. After recovering from a crash, the leader sends `POST` to the aggregate job with either:

- `round = n`: helper has seen this message before the leader crashed and sends its current state (round _n+1_ prepare messages). Protocol continues from there. 
- `round = n+1`: helper advances its state to the next round. Protocol continues from there.
- any other value of `round`: the leader and helper are too far out of sync. The aggregate job must be abandoned. The leader could recover by creating a new aggregate job with the same parameters, essentially going back to the first round. 

So I think either notion (request hash or round number) can achieve the functionality we want. Question is: which is "better"?

> We use a POST here because this request is _not_ idempotent. Suppose the leader sends `POST /tasks/task-id/aggregate_jobs/aggregation-job-id` where the body has `round = 1`, and that this is successfully handled by the helper. Besides generating the response, this will have the side effect of advancing the state in the helper to round 2. If the leader were to resend the `POST /tasks/task-id/aggregate_jobs/aggregation-job-id` with `round = 1`, then the request should be rejected by the helper, because it has advanced to the next round.

Reviewer 3: > Where would the helper hashing the leader's PUT request help?

The only purpose of storing the (hash of) the previous request is to ensure that the response the Helper gives is coherent (i.e. matches the request).

While you are correct that the Leader should (if properly following DAP) always send the same request, there is nothing practically ensuring this if the Helper doesn't check somehow. A sufficiently-buggy Leader could send any request at all, and without the hash (or some other mechanism) to allow the request to be verified, the Helper would give the answer a non-buggy Leader would have received rather than the error the actually-buggy Leader should receive.

If folks don't think it's valuable to avoid this scenario, storage of the (hash of) the request can be dropped. IMO, I wouldn't recommend this (it's unlikely to come up in practice, but if it does, the results will likely be _very_ confusing to operators).

> We use a POST here because this request is _not_ idempotent. Suppose the leader sends `POST /tasks/task-id/aggregate_jobs/aggregation-job-id` where the body has `round = 1`, and that this is successfully handled by the helper. Besides generating the response, this will have the side effect of advancing the state in the helper to round 2. If the leader were to resend the `POST /tasks/task-id/aggregate_jobs/aggregation-job-id` with `round = 1`, then the request should be rejected by the helper, because it has advanced to the next round.

Author: Yeah, I think you're on to something. I had hoped that cases where the leader is sending the wrong prepare messages after a restart would be caught by failures in the helper's `Vdaf.prep_next` call, but at best they'd be caught on the next round.

What do you think about considering this fault recovery case separately from the resource oriented API change? The PR that introduces that into the protocol text will already be quite large, and this scenario that we are discussing is nuanced enough that it would benefit from having a spotlight shone on it, which is to say, a PR dedicated to making just that change.

> We use a POST here because this request is _not_ idempotent. Suppose the leader sends `POST /tasks/task-id/aggregate_jobs/aggregation-job-id` where the body has `round = 1`, and that this is successfully handled by the helper. Besides generating the response, this will have the side effect of advancing the state in the helper to round 2. If the leader were to resend the `POST /tasks/task-id/aggregate_jobs/aggregation-job-id` with `round = 1`, then the request should be rejected by the helper, because it has advanced to the next round.

Reviewer 3: Sure -- I think the issues are separable. Probably the resource-oriented API should be specified first, then can be tweaked if necessary to achieve idempotency or otherwise solve the fault-recovery issue.

> We use a POST here because this request is _not_ idempotent. Suppose the leader sends `POST /tasks/task-id/aggregate_jobs/aggregation-job-id` where the body has `round = 1`, and that this is successfully handled by the helper. Besides generating the response, this will have the side effect of advancing the state in the helper to round 2. If the leader were to resend the `POST /tasks/task-id/aggregate_jobs/aggregation-job-id` with `round = 1`, then the request should be rejected by the helper, because it has advanced to the next round.

Reviewer 3: It occurs to me it might wiser to leave it up to the implementation: the fault-recovery logic `MUST` check the request's round number, and `SHOULD`(?) check the entire request [worded to allow checking equality or by hash or some other technically-approximate method]. WDYT?

If the helper received the `POST` and advanced its state to the second round, then the leader should do `GET /tasks/task-id/aggregate_jobs/aggregation-job-id` so it can compute the second round broadcast message and then do `POST /tasks/task-id/aggregate_jobs/aggregation-job-id` to have the helper move to the finished state. If the helper did not receive the `POST`, then the leader should re-send the first-round broadcast prepare message.

But in DAP-02, the leader has no way to know what happened in the helper, leaving it unable to recover from this state. Adding a `round` field to the `AggregateJob` message enables the leader to reliably and idempotently find out what state the helper is in by doing `GET /tasks/task-id/aggregate_jobs/aggregation-job-id`, and then taking the appropriate next step.

##### DELETE

Instructs the helper to abandon the aggregate job and allows it to discard all state related to it.

Requiring this would solve https://github.com/ietf-wg-ppm/draft-ietf-ppm-dap/issues/241

### Aggregation jobs

Only the helper supports this resource.

#### Path

`/tasks/task-id/aggregation_jobs`

#### Representation

> A paginated list of aggregation jobs for the task.

Author: Given that aggregation job IDs are assigned by the leader, I believe you are right, because the leader should be able to maintain an authoritative list of agg jobs itself instead of relying on the helper.

```
struct {
  u64 page;
  AggregateJob aggregate_jobs<0..2^16-1>

> } AggregationJobList

Reviewer 4: I think the list responses will require some additional metadata to indicate when to stop requesting pages.

Author: Yeah, I should have put a TODO there, because the pagination stuff isn't completely thought through. In fact we should follow the lead of ACME here and use link relations. [RFC 8288](https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/rfc8288) appears to be the relevant reference.

However, it's possible we can get away without providing the endpoints for listing aggregation jobs, aggregate shares and collections if we can instead work out a way for protocol participants to query for exactly the aggregation job, aggregate share or collection they care about, perhaps by putting things like aggregation parameters, batch selectors or queries into query parameters.

Author: Resolving since the list resources have been deleted anyway, but if/when we want something like this again, RFC 8288 link relations are the way to go.

```

#### Required HTTP methods

##### GET/HEAD

The request takes an optional query parameter for the page. The response body is a `struct AggregationJobList`.

### An aggregate share

Only the helper supports this resource.

#### Path

`/tasks/task-id/aggregate_shares/aggregate-share-id`

> `aggregate-share-id` uniquely identifies an aggregate share. It is chosen by the leader when it requests an aggregate share by the helper.

Author: Yes, aggregate share ID is new, and introduced for consistency with other resources, and for the same fundamental reason that I introduce `collection-id`. The helper's aggregate share resource is strongly analogous to the leader's collection resource, so a lot of the same considerations apply, including the question of whether or not an aggregate share or collection is uniquely identified by the (aggregation parameter, query) tuple. Anyway, I'll discuss that question further in the collection-id portions of the doc [here](https://github.com/ietf-wg-ppm/draft-ietf-ppm-dap/pull/367/files#r997427041).

#### Required HTTP methods

##### GET/HEAD

If the aggregate share is available, the result is a `struct AggregateShare`. Otherwise the server can return something like HTTP 202 Accepted to indicate it's not ready yet, or HTTP 404 if no such aggregate share is known to the helper.

##### PUT

PUT to an aggregate share resource is how the leader instructs the helper to compute aggregate shares. The request is an idempotent PUT, because if an aggregate share with the provided ID already exists, its representation can be returned by the helper without further state mutation.

The body of the request is an `AggregateShareReq`:

```
struct {
  QueryType query_type;
  select (BatchSelector.query_type) {
    case time_interval: Interval batch_interval;
    case fixed_size: Empty;
  };
} BatchSelector;

struct {
  BatchSelector batch_selector;
  opaque agg_param<0..2^16-1>;
  uint64 report_count;
  opaque checksum[32];
} AggregateShareReq;
```

If successful, the response from the helper is a `struct AggregateShare`. That same share may later be obtained by a GET request on the resource.

This is analogous to DAP-02's `POST /aggregate_share`.

###### A note on `BatchSelector.fixed_size`

> In DAP-02, a `BatchSelector` with `query_type = fixed_size` contains a `BatchID`. In this API, the batch ID hoisted up into the resource URI. This implies that `time_interval`-type queries now also have a batch ID, chosen by the leader. While aggregate shares will often (always?) be 1:1 with collections, the IDs do not have to match.

Author: I think this again is the question of what uniquely identifies an aggregate share or collection, which I'd like to consolidate [here](https://github.com/ietf-wg-ppm/draft-ietf-ppm-dap/pull/367/files#r997427041).

> In DAP-02, a `BatchSelector` with `query_type = fixed_size` contains a `BatchID`. In this API, the batch ID hoisted up into the resource URI. This implies that `time_interval`-type queries now also have a batch ID, chosen by the leader. While aggregate shares will often (always?) be 1:1 with collections, the IDs do not have to match.

Reviewer: Hmm, are you confusing "batchID" with "aggJobID" here? I don't see as batch ID in the agg job endpoint.

> In DAP-02, a `BatchSelector` with `query_type = fixed_size` contains a `BatchID`. In this API, the batch ID hoisted up into the resource URI. This implies that `time_interval`-type queries now also have a batch ID, chosen by the leader. While aggregate shares will often (always?) be 1:1 with collections, the IDs do not have to match.

Author: This is aggregate share, not aggregate job, which does reference batch ID in [DAP-02](https://www.ietf.org/archive/id/draft-ietf-ppm-dap-02.html#section-4.5.2-3)

Note also that `AggregateShareReq` should use a `Query` (https://github.com/ietf-wg-ppm/draft-ietf-ppm-dap/issues/366).

TODO: timg to read more about chunky DAP and think about how it intersects with this proposal, especially https://github.com/ietf-wg-ppm/draft-ietf-ppm-dap/issues/342

##### DELETE

Instructs the helper to abandon the aggregate share and allows the helper to discard all state related to it. This is akin to DELETE on a collection for the leader.

### Aggregate shares

Only the helper supports this resource.

#### Path

`/tasks/task-id/aggregate_shares`

#### Representation

> A paginated list of aggregation jobs for the task.

Reviewer 3: Why do we need a paginated list of aggregate shares?

I think this can be dropped from the specification (& left up to implementations, if they find it handy).

Author: Agreed, I will delete this resource.

> A paginated list of aggregation jobs for the task.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
A paginated list of aggregate shares for the task.
```

```
struct {
  u64 page;
  AggregateShare aggregate_shares<0..2^16-1>
} AggregateShareList
```

#### Required HTTP methods

##### GET/HEAD

The request takes an optional query parameter for the page. The response body is a `struct AggregateShareList`.

### A collection

Only the leader supports this resource.

#### Path

`/tasks/task-id/collections/collection-id`

> `collection-id` uniquely identifies a collection. It is chosen by the collector when it POSTs to the resource.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
`collection-id` uniquely identifies a collection. It is chosen by the collector when it PUTs to the resource.
```

> `collection-id` uniquely identifies a collection. It is chosen by the collector when it POSTs to the resource.

Reviewer 3: Currently DAP doesn't specify collection IDs. Could that be done as part of this work? I think a `CollectionID` as a 16-byte opaque identifier would fit will with similar identifiers in the spec. I think explicitly defining collections would as a side effect make some of the validation logic easier to specify/follow.

(BatchID doesn't work, unfortunately: a collection is logically identified by a batch ID along with an aggregation parameter. A more radical change might be to specify something like `/tasks/{task-id}/batches/{batch-id}/collections/{agg-param}` to collect. This would be very clean in terms of API layout & allowing our validation to be written in terms of explicitly-defined entities, but I don't think we want to commit to putting an aggregation parameter in the URI path -- we don't know how large it is, or that it will fit well in the URL-safe character set.)

The request body is a `CollectReq`:

```
struct {
  QueryType query_type;
  select (Query.query_type) {
    case time_interval: Interval batch_interval;
    case fixed_size: Empty;
  }
} Query;

struct {
  Query query;
  opaque agg_param<0..2^16-1>; /* VDAF aggregation parameter */
} CollectReq;
```

If successful, the response from the helper is a `struct Collection`. That same share may later be obtained by a GET request on the resource.

This is analogous to DAP-02's `POST /collect`.

###### A note on `Query.fixed_size`

`struct Query` is essentially identical to `struct BatchSelector`, so the note about `BatchSelector.fixed_size` from `PUT aggregate_share` applies here, except that a collection's ID is chosen by the collector.

##### DELETE

Instructs the leader to abandon the collection and allows the leader to discard all state related to it. This is akin to DELETE on an aggregate share for the helper (indeed, the leader might send a DELETE to the helper's aggregate share resource after its corresponding collection is deleted).

This is analogous to DAP-02's `DELETE` on a collect job URI.

#### Alternatives: `collection-id`, `PUT` vs. `POST` and idempotence?

> This proposal introduces the notion of a `collection-id`, which is chosen by the collector when it sends `CollectReq` to helper. In DAP-02, a collection is already uniquely identified by the combination of the aggregation parameter and the query, meaning we can get by without `collection-id`. Let's sketch out what the API would look like so we can weigh pros and cons.

Reviewer 3: > a collection is already uniquely identified by the combination of the aggregation parameter and the query

nit: this is true today but won't be true once #342 is resolved; at that point, there will be some mechanism for the Collector's `Query` to say something like "I don't know the specific batch I want, just give me one that's ready (if any)" -- i.e. the Collector's `Query` will not directly identify a single specific batch.

I guess the more accurate way of saying this would be that a collection is identified by an aggregation parameter and a batch identifier (literally `BatchID` for fixed-size, a time interval for time-interval).

Author: A recurring set of questions here is (1) whether aggregate shares and collections need an opaque ID to uniquely identify them beyond the (aggregate parameter, query) tuple and (2) who should choose that ID if it is needed. I'm still ruminating on this; more thoughts to follow in this thread.

Author: - [ ] Do we need an API level concept of collection ID or aggregate share ID? If so, who chooses those IDs? Can the same solution work for both time interval and chunky DAP queries?

`POST /tasks/task-id/collections`

The body is a `CollectReq`, defined as above. The request method is `POST` instead of `PUT` because I don't think this request can be idempotent. Let's say a collector makes a time interval query over some interval _i_ and it is received by the leader at time _t1_. At _t1_, the leader has _n1_ reports that fall into the interval _i_. Then, suppose at least one more report that falls into _i_ arrives and the leader and helper prepare it. Then, at _t2 > t1_, the collector sends a query with the same interval _i_ again.

> Should the leader serve up the results it computed at time _t1_? Or should it make a new collection, consuming another unit of max batch query, that includes the reports that arrived and were prepared between _t1_ and _t2_?

Reviewer 3: I'm confused, wouldn't the leader ignore the reports that fall into interval _i_ after the first collection request at _t1_? 

From DAP-02: "The Leader MUST ignore any report pertaining to a batch that has already been collected."

Multiple collections for a single batch are to allow aggregation parameter to vary; I don't think the current wording of DAP-02 allows for collecting "the same batch but with a few more reports that have arrived since the last collection" to avoid potentially breaking privacy of those new reports.

Author: You are correct, I forgot about that requirement in DAP-02. I need to revisit this text after thinking harder about `current-batch` and fixed batch queries in general.

If collections are identified by `collection-id`, then there's no ambiguity: the collector can poll `GET /tasks/task-id/collections/collection-id` to obtain the same collection over and over again. `PUT /tasks/task-id/collections/collection-id` with the same `collection-id` is also unambiguous, and if the collector wants to make a new query with the same interval, it can choose a new `collection-id` and `PUT` that, which the leader will service if the task's parameters allow it.

The cons of `collection-id` is that an aggregation parameter and a `struct Query` don't uniquely identify a collection. So if a collector wants to find out if there's an existing collect job that meets its parameter, it has to enumerate all of them using `GET /tasks/task-id/collections`. We could improve this either with [HTTP QUERY](https://www.ietf.org/archive/id/draft-ietf-httpbis-safe-method-w-body-02.html) or query params on `GET /tasks/task-id/collections`.

### Collections

Only the leader supports this resource.

#### Path

`/tasks/task-id/collections`

#### Representation

> A paginated list of collections for the task.

Reviewer 3: Why do we need a paginated list of collection jobs?

I think this can be dropped from the specification (& left up to implementations, if they find it handy).

Author: Deleted with the other list resources
